so whenever I visit a school and talk to
students I was asked them the same thing
why do you Google why is Google the
search engine of choice for you
strangely enough I always get the same
three answers one because it works which
is a great answer that's why I Google to
- somebody will say I really don't know
of any alternatives it's not an equally
great answer and my reply to that is
usually try to google the word search
engine you may find a couple interesting
alternatives and last but not least
thirdly inevitably one student will
raise her his hand and say with Google
I'm certain to always get the best
unbiased search result certain to always
get the best unbiased search result now
as a matter of the humanities albeit a
digital humanities man that just makes
my skin curl even if I - realize that
that trusts that ID of the unbiased
search result is a cornerstone and our
collective love for an appreciation of
Google I will show you why that
philosophically is almost an
impossibility but let me first elaborate
just a little bit on a basic principle
behind each search query that we
sometimes seem to forget so whenever you
set out to Google something start by
asking yourself this am i looking for an
isolated fact what is the capital of
France what are the building blocks of a
water molecule great Google away you
know there's not a group of scientists
who are this close to proving that it's
actually London and h3o you don't see a
big conspiracy among those things we
agree on a global scale what the answers
are to these isolated facts but if you
complicate your question just a little
bit and ask something like why is there
an Israeli Palestine conflict
you're not exactly looking for a
singular fact anymore you're looking for
knowledge which is something way more
complicated
delicate and to get to knowledge you
have to bring ten or twenty or a hundred
facts to the table and acknowledge them
and say yes these are all true but
because of who I am young or old or
black or white or gay or straight I will
value them differently and I will say
yes this is true but this is more
important to me than that and this is
where it becomes interesting because
this is where we become human this is
when we start to argue to form society
and to really get somewhere we need to
filter all our facts here through
friends and neighbors and parents and
children and co-workers and newspapers
and magazines to finally be grounded in
real knowledge which is something that a
search engine is a poor help to achieve
so I promise you an example just to show
you why it's so hard to get to the point
of true clean objective knowledge as
food for thought I will conduct a couple
of simple queries search queries will
start by Michelle Obama first lady the
United States and will click for
pictures it works really well as you can
see say perfect search result more or
less it's just her in the picture not
even a president how does this work
quite simple I mean Google uses a lot of
smartness to achieve this but quite
simply they look at two things more than
anything
first what does it say in the caption
what does it say under the picture on
each website does it say Michelle Obama
under the picture pretty good indication
it's actually her on their second google
looks at the picture file the name of
the file as such uploaded to the website
again is it called Michelle Obama jpg
pretty good indication is not clean
these put in the picture so you got
those two and you get a search result
like this almost now in 2009 Michelle
Obama was the victim of a racist
campaign where people set out to insult
her through her search results there was
a picture distributed widely over the
internet where her face was distorted to
look like a monkey and that picture was
published all over and people published
it very very purposefully to get it up
here in the search
result they made sure to write Michelle
Obama in the caption and they made sure
to upload the picture as Michelle Obama
JPEG or the like so you get why to
manipulate the search result and it
worked too so when you picture google
for Michelle Obama in 2009 that
distorted monkey picture showed up among
the first results now the results are
self cleansing and that's sort of the
beauty of it because google measures
relevance every every hour every day
however Google didn't settle for that
this time they just thought that's
racist and it's a bad search result and
we're gonna go back and clean that up
manually we are gonna write some code
and fix it which they did and I don't
think that anyone in this room thinks
that that was a bad idea me neither but
then a couple years go by and the
world's most googled under under
spearing brave ich did what he did this
is July 22nd in 2011 and a terrible day
in a region history this man a
terrorists blew up a couple of
government buildings walking distance
from where we are right now in Oslo
Norway and he traveled out to the island
of Judea and shot and killed a group of
kids almost 80 people died that day and
a lot of people would describe this act
of terror as two steps that he did two
things he blew up the buildings and he
shot those kids it's not true it was
three steps he blew up those buildings
he shot those kids and he sat down and
waited for the world to google him and
he prepared all three steps equally well
and if there was somebody who
immediately understood this it was a
Swedish web developer or search engine
optimization expert in Stockholm named
Nicky Lindquist he's also very political
guy and he was right out there in social
media on his blog on Facebook and he
told everybody if there's something that
this guy wants right now it's to control
the image of himself let's see if we can
distort that let's see if we in the
civilized world can protest against what
he did through insulting him in his
search results and how he told all of
his readers the following
go out there on the internet find
pictures of dog poop on sidewalks find
pictures of dog poops and sidewalks
publish them in your feeds on your
websites and your blogs make sure to
write the terrorist name in the caption
make sure to name the picture file gravy
JPEG let's teach Google that that's the
face of the terrorist and it worked two
years after that campaign against
Michelle Obama this manipulation
campaign against under speeding play
week worked if you picture Google for
him the weeks after the July 22nd events
from Sweden you'd see that picture of
dog poop high up in the search result as
a little protest
strangely enough Google didn't intervene
this time they did not step in and
manually clean those search results up
so the million-dollar question is there
anything different between these two
happenings here is there is anything
different between what happened to
Michelle Obama and what happened to us
being Braley and of course not if the
exact same thing yet Google intervened
in one case and not in the other why
well because Michelle Obama is an
honorable person that's why an
understating Drabek is a despicable
person see what happens there an
evaluation of a person takes place and
there's only one power in the world one
power player in the world with the
authority to say who's who we like you
we dislike you we believe in you we
don't believe in you you're right you're
wrong you're true you're false
you're Obama and you're Braddock that's
power if I ever saw it so I'm asking you
to remember that between behind every
algorithm it's always a person a person
with a set of personal beliefs that no
code can ever completely eradicate and
my message goes out not only to Google
but to all believers in the faith of
code around the world you need to
identify your own personal bias you need
to understand that you are human and
take responsibility accordingly and I
say this because I believe that we've
reached a point in time
when it's absolutely imperative that we
tie those bonds together again tighter
the humanities and the technology
tighter than ever and if nothing else to
remind us that that wonderfully
seductive idea of the unbiased clean
search result is and is likely to remain
a myth thank you for your time
[Applause]